When you’re ready to shut down Linux, you must do so in an orderly manner. 
Even if you’re the sole user of a Linux PC, several other programs usually run in 
the background. Also, operating systems such as Linux try to optimize the way 
that they write data to the hard drive. Because hard-drive access is relatively slow 
(compared with the time needed to access memory locations), data generally is 
held in memory and written to the hard drive in large chunks. Therefore, if you 
simply turn off the power, you run the risk that some files won’t be updated 
properly.
Trying Out Linux
CHAPTER 4 Trying Out Linux 65
Any user can shut down the system from the desktop or from the graphical login 
screen without even being logged in, although some distributions, such as Debian, 
prompt for the root password. Typically, you should look for a Log Out option on 
the main menu or submenus. When you choose this option, a Log Out dialog box 
appears, providing options for logging out immediately or waiting 60 seconds. 
More detailed menu options can include rebooting or halting the system in addition to simply logging out. To shut down the system, choose Shutdown and then 
click OK. The system shuts down in an orderly manner.
If the logout menu doesn’t have a shutdown option, first log out and then select 
Shutdown on the graphical login screen. You can also shut down a Linux computer 
from a terminal with the command init 0. This method is sometimes required 
if you’re running the operating system within a virtual software manager such as 
VMware.
While the system shuts down, you see messages about processes shutting down. 
You may be surprised by how many processes there are even when no one is 
explicitly running any programs on the system. If your system doesn’t automatically power off on shutdown, you can turn off the power manually.
Shutting down or rebooting the system may not require root access, so it’s important to make sure that physical access to the console is protected adequately. You 
don’t want just anyone to be able to simply walk up to the console and shut down 
your system.
You don’t always need to shut down when you’re finished with a session; instead, 
you may choose to log out. To log out of KDE, choose Main Menu➪ Logout. You can 
also right-click an empty area of the desktop and choose Logout from the contextual menu that appears. To log out from GNOME, choose System➪ Log Out. Click 
OK when a dialog box asks whether you really want to log out. (In some GNOME 
desktop distributions, the logout menu option is the second or third menu button 
from the left on the top panel.